---
layout: post
title: Equivariant Machine Learning Decoder for 3D Toric Codes
categories:
- papers
- preprint
- thesis
---
For my MSc thesis with the [AMLab](https://amlab.science.uva.nl/), I embarked on my first exploration into quantum computing, focusing on Quantum Error Correction (QEC). My supervisor, [Evgenii Egorov](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=LwVVunEAAAAJ&hl=de&oi=ao), suggested this topic, building on [his research on Equivariant Decoders for QEC](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.07362). 

In my thesis, I extended the work from 2D toric codes to 3D toric codes and also explored the integration of Transformer models with equivariant CNNs. In response to a request on my GitHub repository, I decided to publish this work on [arXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.04300) to make it accessible to the broader research community.
__I`m very happy if you are giving feedback on this work as I want to improve this paper.__

The projects code can be found [here](https://github.com/oliverweissl/NeuralDecoderToric3D).

### Abstract:

> Mitigating errors in computing and communication systems has seen a great deal of research since the beginning of the widespread use of these technologies. However, as we develop new methods to do computation or communication, we also need to reiterate the method used to deal with errors. Within the field of quantum computing, error correction is getting a lot of attention since errors can propagate fast and invalidate results, which makes the theoretical exponential speed increase in computation time, compared to traditional systems, obsolete. To correct errors in quantum systems, error-correcting codes are used. A subgroup of codes, topological codes, is currently the focus of many research papers. Topological codes represent parity check matrices corresponding to graphs embedded on a d-dimensional surface. For our research, the focus lies on the toric code with a 3D square lattice. The goal of any decoder is robustness to noise, which can increase with code size. However, a reasonable decoder performance scales polynomially with lattice size. As error correction is a time-sensitive operation, we propose a neural network using an inductive bias: equivariance. This allows the network to learn from a rather small subset of the exponentially growing training space of possible inputs. In addition, we investigate how transformer networks can help in correction. These methods will be compared with various configurations and previously published methods of decoding errors in the 3D toric code.
